                              Documentation for
                                TrakStar/SGP4
                                    with
                                 Visibility

                                 Developed by
                                 Dr TS Kelso

                                 Version 2.65
                               2000 January 22

Copyright (C) 1992-2000.  All rights reserved.


PURPOSE

The enclosed Pascal source code implements the NORAD SGP4/SDP4 orbital 
models for use with the standard two-line orbital element sets to 
determine earth-centered inertial (ECI) and topocentric coordinates of 
earth-orbiting objects. This code implements both the near-earth and 
deep-space portions of the NORAD SGP4 orbital model.  This program is 
built on the new Pascal units contained in SGP4-PLB26A.ZIP (SGP4 Pascal 
Libraries Version 2.65).


OVERVIEW

This program is intended to be as straightforward as possible.  It 
permits the user to calculate any of the following for user-designated 
satellites and observing stations:

     1) Earth-Centered Inertial (ECI) Position and Velocity
     2) Latitude, Longitude, and Altitude
     3) Look Angles (Azimuth, Elevation, Range, and Range Rate)
     4) Right Ascension and Declination (Topocentric)

This new version also calculates satellite visibility information, 
showing when a satellite is in earth eclipse (first two options above) 
or, optionally, restricting pass conditions (second two options above) 
to visible passes only.

The program accepts as input, pre-defined files of satellite two-line 
element sets and observer coordinates and outputs all data as text 
files.


OPTIONS

The program begins by allowing the user to select the appropriate option 
from the choices above.  A window is placed on the screen and the active 
option is highlighted.  The up and down cursor keys are used to move 
among the options; pressing <ENTER> selects the active option.  The 
window remains on the screen to show which option was selected (only the 
active window, however, is highlighted).

If Options 3 or 4 are selected, the user is prompted to select whether 
only visible passes should be output or all passes.  If visible passes 
are selected, the user is also prompted to select the criteria for 
twilight.  Choices are civil (sun 6 degrees or more below the horizon), 
nautical (12 degrees or more), or astronomical (18 degrees or more).  
Civil twilight is recommended.


DATA FILES

The two types of data files required of this program are *.TLE (two-line 
element sets) and *.OB (observer) files.  All data comes from the data 
directory specified on Lines 1 and 2 of TRAKSTAR.CFG (the sample version 
defaults to the current drive and directory).  These two lines should 
look something like:

C:
PATH\

where the first line is the data drive (a blank line indicates to use 
the current drive) and the second line is the data directory (a blank 
line indicates to use the current directory).  The drive letter should 
end with a colon and the path should end with a backslash.

The *.TLE files are structured with up to 250 sets of data consisting of 
a satellite name (24 characters long) and a standard NORAD two-line 
element set.  A sample is presented below:

NOAA 12                 
1 21263U 91032A   99329.00000000  .00001016  00000-0  46795-3 0  5090
2 21263  98.5408 325.7794 0011954 220.1062   7.5043 14.23188367443036
NOAA 14                 
1 23455U 94089A   99329.00000000  .00000712  00000-0  41335-3 0  1251
2 23455  99.1145 298.5400 0009134 313.2001  85.3429 14.12098274252643
NOAA 15                 
1 25338U 98030A   99329.00000000  .00000632  00000-0  29967-3 0  5794
2 25338  98.6607 356.4008 0011020 145.9965 128.3475 14.23036638 79673

Data in this format may be obtained from the CelesTrak WWW site.  The 
user may select the satellite element sets to perform calculations on in 
two ways.  First, the user may break satellites into logical groupings 
(e.g., DMSP.TLE, NOAA.TLE, MIR.TLE, or GOES.TLE)--when selecting 
satellites, the user can select from among up to 50 such files in a 
scrollable window.  These individual files may be easily updated using a 
master file of satellite elements and using the Pass Update program 
(PASSUPDT25A.ZIP).

After the input satellite data file is selected, the user is then 
prompted in another window to tag the satellites to use in the orbital 
calculations. Satellites are tagged by moving the highlight bar to the 
desired satellite (using the up and down cursor keys) and pressing the 
space bar; the highlight bar will advance after each toggle.  To select 
(or deselect) all satellites, use the "A" key.  When the desired 
satellites are tagged, press <ENTER>.  This window does not remain 
visible since it generally is not possible to show all satellites 
selected (since there may be as many as 250 of them).

If an option is selected which is observer based (Look Angles or Right 
Ascension and Declination), a window is also presented to selected the 
observer file (in the same manner as the satellite data file was 
selected). The observer file consists a line for each observation site 
with a name (25 characters long), decimal north latitude (in degrees), 
decimal east longitude (in degrees), and altitude above mean sea level 
(in meters).  A sample follows:

DAY  Dayton, OH             39.759   -084.195    750
CEL  Beavercreek, OH        39.760   -084.061   1010

The first three characters of the site name are used in the output and 
should be unique; it is recommended that they be set up as in this 
example.


TIME SETTINGS

Once the input files have been designated, the start and stop times and 
the output time interval must be specified.  A box will be presented for 
each selection.  For the start time, the program will read the current 
system time and offer it as the default time (since it is assumed that 
the user will want to generate ephemerides for the near future).  The 
user may change this time by using the right and left cursor keys to 
select the field (year, month, day, hour, minutes, seconds, hundredths 
of seconds) and the up and down cursor keys to change the selected field 
(up increases, down decreases); the Home and End keys will go to the 
beginning or end of the selected range, respectively. This method of 
selection is designed to prevent inappropriate inputs.

Once the start time is selected, a window for the stop time appears, 
with the start time offered as a default (since the stop time MUST be 
greater than or equal to the start time).  After the stop time is 
selected, the time interval is presented for input; intervals can range 
from one second to just under ten days (propagations longer than this 
will probably not be very accurate).

While all internal calculations are done using UTC, TrakStar converts 
input and output times to local time based on the last two lines of 
TRAKSTAR.CFG. For example, Eastern Standard Time would be represented 
as:

-5.0                              % Time difference from UTC (hours)
N                                 % Allow for Daylight Savings Time

To generate times as UTC, simply set the time difference to zero.


OUTPUT

Once the data to be used and the time conditions have been selected, the 
program begins generating output.  For each element set selected, an 
output file will be generated of the form OPTcatnr.els where OPT is the 
option selected (ECI, LLA, OBS, RAD, VOB, or VRD), catnr is the 
five-digit NORAD Catalog Number, and els is the three-digit element set 
number (note that this means you can generate data for files containing 
different element sets for the same object).

Data is directed to the drive and directory specified on Lines 3 and 4 
of the file TRAKSTAR.CFG.  These lines take the same format as Lines 1 
and 2.  The sample file included with this distribution defaults to the 
current drive and directory.

For complete descriptions of the output formats, look at the 
documentation in SGP4-PLB26A.ZIP (SGP4 Pascal Libraries Version 2.65).

For Options 1 and 2 (ECI and LLA), data is generated for the entire time 
period specified.  If the start and stop times are the same, only one 
line of output will be generated.  Output consists of date and time 
followed by (1) ECI position (in kilometers) and velocity (in 
kilometers/second) or (2) geodetic latitude, longitude, and altitude.  
An ECL at the end of the line indicates that the satellite is in umbral 
earth eclipse.  Sample outputs of these formats are included in this 
package.

For Options 3 and 4 (OBS and RAD or VOB and VRD), which are observer 
based, the program will perform calculations for the entire time period 
for the first observer before doing the same for the next observer.  
Therefore, output in the file will consist of observations separated by 
observing site.  In the output for all passes (OBS and RAD), only 
observations which are visible to the observer (i.e., above the horizon) 
are placed in the output file.  For visible passes (VOB and VRD), only 
observations which are (1) above the horizon when (2) the sun is below 
the appropriate threshold and (3) the satellite is not in umbral earth 
eclipse are output.  All observations are calculated taking atmospheric 
refraction into account (under standard temperature and pressure).

For the OBS (look angles for all passes) or VOB (look angles for visible 
passes), output consists of date and time followed by azimuth (degrees), 
elevation (degrees), range (kilometers), and range rate 
(kilometers/second). For the RAD (right ascension/declination for all 
passes) or VRD (right ascension/declination for visible passes), output 
consists of date and time followed by topocentric right ascension and 
declination.

Sample outputs of these formats are included in this package.  Note that 
the files have a separator (a blank line) between passes.


CONCLUSION

This program provides a state-of-the-art and highly accurate 
implementation of the NORAD orbital models to easily generate various 
forms of ephemerides.  For current data, ECI positions agree to the 
sub-meter level with Air Force Space Command-developed models.  And the 
look angle module has been shown to be accurate to better than one-tenth 
of a degree (typically around one-hundredth of a degree). For details on 
accuracy, see the article "Real-World Benchmarking" at:

    http://celestrak.com/columns/

TrakStar was the first program to fully use the Turbo Pascal SGP4 units 
just released and is part of a continuing effort to promote 
standardization of orbital calculations using the NORAD orbital models.  
As always, I will endeavor to continue to improve these packages and will 
gratefully accept user feedback or contributions to the effort.

                                       - Dr TS Kelso
                                         CelesTrak WWW
                                         http://celestrak.com
                                         E-Mail:  tskelso@celestrak.com
                                         Beavercreek, OH
